03.14.26

In the past month or so, I've been more motivated to code in my free time.
However, instead of doing any actually work, I just rewrote my neovim config.
Hopefully, this new post can demonstrate the process of creating a config, both for newer users or experienced users looking to rewrite theirs.

The old configuration was from when I used to code in my free time more frequent, back in 2023.
It was set up on an old v0.10 build of neovim, and required many plugins to get into a usable state.
With the new autocomplete and plugin manager features in recent builds (v0.11 and v0.12 respectively), very simple and minimal setups can be created.

You can find my full config on my github [here](https://github.com/dtjandra888/nvim-config).

## The basics
The nvim config starts with the `init.lua` file.
In theory, our entire config can exist just in this one file.
I find modularity more organized, and create two separate directories: `lua/core` and `lua/plugins`.
Note that `lua/` in the config root is required, or else lua will not know they are modules.
We load them in with `require()`:

```lua
require("core")
require("plugins")
```

Each of these modules has their own `init.lua`, but like I said, I prefer to keep things organized and split my config across files in these modules.
Whenever you add a new file, be sure to add it to module's init.

Example: `lua/core/init.lua`

```lua
require("core.remap")
require("core.set")
```

## The core
This is where all your non-plugin code will go.
I like to call it this because it reminds me of the Starcraft keyboard layout similarly named [TheCore](https://tl.net/forum/sc2-strategy/341878-thecore-advanced-keyboard-layout).

Starting with the vim options (I like to put these in `set.lua`, but like I said I like modularity; Feel free to put this in either of the `init.lua`s), here are some of my preferred options.

```lua
-- There is some vulnerability with modeline in vim
vim.opt.modeline = false

-- Line numbers (I like relative)
vim.opt.nu = true
vim.opt.rnu = true

-- Internal file searching
vim.opt.hlsearch = false    -- gets annoying type :nohl every time
vim.opt.incsearch = true    

-- Fixing tabs
vim.opt.tabstop = 4
vim.opt.softtabstop = 4
vim.opt.shiftwidth = 4
vim.opt.expandtab = true
vim.opt.smartindent = true
```

If you are creating this config in nvim, you can reload the config with `:so` or `:source`.
This only sources the current file you are on, so if you want to apply all changes across the config, do it at your root `init.lua`.

In the core, I also like to set up my basic keybinds.
For plugin related keybinds, I usually put them in their own plugin file.
We will get to this soon.
Here are some of the more useful keybinds I like.

Set your leader key. I think 99% of people use space.
```lua
vim.g.mapleader = " "
```

I like to press "jj" to return to normal mode. Other people also like "jk" and I have a friend that uses "tab". Either way, experiment and find something you like (or just leave it default; completely up to you).
```lua
vim.keymap.set("i", "jj", "<esc>")
```

One of the frustations that I first had with vim was that it had a separate clipboard from the system one.
However, you can copy and paste to system clipboard with `"+y` and `"+p`. Sometimes you need to install a special tool for this.
Do a `:checkhealth vim.provider` and scroll to the clipboard section.

```lua
vim.keymap.set({ "n", "v" }, "<leader>y", "\"+y")
vim.keymap.set({ "n", "v" }, "<leader>p", "\"+p")
```

I also like to set a bind for autocomplete.
Neovim has built in autocomplete now with omnicomplete, but its blocked behind a clunky Ctrl+x, Ctrl+o bind.
I change it to Ctrl+Space.
```lua
vim.keymap.set('i', '<C-Space>', '<C-x><C-o>', { silent = true })
```

The final thing I want to showcase in this section is that you can set keybinds to run multiple commands.
I have this nifty bind to open a new tab to netrw.
```lua
vim.keymap.set("n", "<leader>t",
    function()
        vim.cmd("tabnew")
        vim.cmd("Ex")
    end, { noremap = true })
```

## Plugins
This is where the fun begins.
In v0.12 they added a built-in plugin manager.
Simply call `vim.pack.add()` with a list of the links to the plugins you want to install.
Do `:help vim.pack` for more details.
Here's my current list of plugins. 

```lua
vim.pack.add({
    'https://github.com/nvim-telescope/telescope.nvim',
    'https://github.com/sainnhe/sonokai',
    'https://github.com/neovim/nvim-lspconfig',
    'https://github.com/nvim-lua/plenary.nvim',
    'https://github.com/nvim-treesitter/nvim-treesitter',
})
```

I'm not going to go over every plugin here, because I feel like this post is getting a bit long. I will try to cover the main points of the important ones. 

### lsp
You just call `vim.lsp.enable()` with a list of the language servers cmd.
You need to install these separately.
There are plugins that do this, but I only use a handful of languages so I don't use one.

```lua
vim.lsp.enable({
    'lua_ls',
    'pylsp',
    'clangd',
})
```

To actually use the lsp, I set keybinds call different things in the API.
See `:h lsp-buf` for more things options you can set.
The following is an example for language formatting.
```lua
vim.keymap.set('n', '<leader>lf', vim.lsp.buf.format)
```

The language servers need a configuration to work, and I just use the ones from [nvim-lspconfig](https://github.com/neovim/nvim-lspconfig).

### Treesitter
Treesitter is built into nvim, but I like to use [nvim-treesitter](https://github.com/nvim-treesitter/nvim-treesitter) to install them.
You will need treesitter-cli and a C compiler in your path (this can be tricky on windows from my experience).
The setup is super simple:

```lua
require('nvim-treesitter').install({
    'cpp'
})
```

## Other tips
I'm a big fan of using a symbolic link for my nvim config.
For those unfamilar, a symbolic link is when a file path "A" points to another file path "B".
When "A" is opened, it will load the file in location "B".
By using a symbolic link, we can create our nvim config where we put all our other projects, and still have nvim load it in properly.
To me, this feels more elegant that having a git repo in my `.config` directory or having to copy my files whenever I make a change.
Here's the command if you are interested:

```ln -s <src-path> $HOME/.config/nvim```

